# Experimental Design and ANOVA

We want to study how feedback type ($A_1$ encouraging, $A_2$ neutral, $A_3$ critical) and task difficulty ($B_1$ easy and $B_2$ difficult) influence participants' task performance.

Participants first complete a baseline task, then receive one of three feedback types $A_i \;(i\in\{1,2,3\})$. After which they perform a task of difficulty $B_j \; (j\in{1,2})$

The dependent variable $y$ is participants' task performance measured by accuracy and time used, subtract their baseline task performance measured by the same metrics. 

Each feedback $\times$ difficulty condition contains 10 participants.

The results are as follows.

??? info "Click to expand the result table"
    <table>
        <thead>
        <tr>
            <th rowspan="2">Replicate</th>
            <th colspan="3">B<sub>1</sub> (Easy)</th>
            <th colspan="3">B<sub>2</sub> (Difficult)</th>
        </tr>
        <tr>
            <th>A<sub>1</sub> (Encouraging)</th>
            <th>A<sub>2</sub> (Neutral)</th>
            <th>A<sub>3</sub> (Critical)</th>
            <th>A<sub>1</sub> (Encouraging)</th>
            <th>A<sub>2</sub> (Neutral)</th>
            <th>A<sub>3</sub> (Critical)</th>
        </tr>
        </thead>
    <tbody>
        <tr><td>1</td><td>3.2</td><td>8.5</td><td>24.5</td><td>23.5</td><td>9.5</td><td>-4.5</td></tr>
        <tr><td>2</td><td>5.1</td><td>11.2</td><td>26.2</td><td>26.1</td><td>8.2</td><td>-6.2</td></tr>
        <tr><td>3</td><td>4.8</td><td>9.8</td><td>25.8</td><td>24.8</td><td>11.8</td><td>-5.8</td></tr>
        <tr><td>4</td><td>6.5</td><td>12.1</td><td>27.1</td><td>27.2</td><td>7.1</td><td>-7.1</td></tr>
        <tr><td>5</td><td>2.9</td><td>7.9</td><td>23.9</td><td>22.9</td><td>12.9</td><td>-3.9</td></tr>
        <tr><td>6</td><td>5.0</td><td>10.5</td><td>25.5</td><td>25.5</td><td>10.5</td><td>-5.5</td></tr>
        <tr><td>7</td><td>6.2</td><td>11.8</td><td>26.8</td><td>26.8</td><td>9.2</td><td>-6.8</td></tr>
        <tr><td>8</td><td>4.1</td><td>9.1</td><td>24.1</td><td>24.1</td><td>10.8</td><td>-4.1</td></tr>
        <tr><td>9</td><td>7.3</td><td>10.0</td><td>25.0</td><td>23.9</td><td>10.0</td><td>-5.0</td></tr>
        <tr><td>10</td><td>4.9</td><td>9.1</td><td>26.1</td><td>25.2</td><td>10.0</td><td>-6.1</td></tr>
    </tbody>
    </table>

We want to ask the question: 

*What causes the variation in performance? Or, where does the variation come from? Is the variation meaningful, or is it just inflated by some random errors?*

Now, consider each subject's score.

$$y_{i,j,k} \; (i\in\{1,2,3\},j\in\{1,2\}, k\in\{x\in\mathbb{Z}:1\leqslant x\leqslant10\})$$


What likely causes each participant's score different from the grand mean? 

1. Maybe the feedback type they received causes it;
2. Maybe it is due to the task difficulty they received;
3. Maybe, some specific combination of feedback type and task difficulty does something;
4. Or, it is mostly consistent with residual error?

So, we can construct a model that accounts for the above four speculations.

$$
y_{i,j,k}
=
\mu+\alpha_i+\beta_j+(\alpha\beta)_{i,j}+\varepsilon_{i,j,k}
$$

Unfortunately, most of the terms above is not directly observable. We have to estimate the these terms using our already available information.

$$
y_{i,j,k}
=
\hat{\mu}+\widehat{\alpha_i}+\widehat{\beta_j}+\widehat{(\alpha\beta)_{i,j}}+\widehat{\varepsilon_{i,j,k}}
$$

where:

$$\hat{\mu} = \frac{1}{IJK} \sum_{i,j,k}y_{i,j,k}$$

is called the grand mean of our dependent variable $y$.

$$
\widehat{\alpha_i} = \frac{1}{JK}\sum_{j,k} (y_{i,j,k} -\hat{\mu}) = \frac{1}{JK} \sum_{j,k} y_{i,j,k} - \hat{\mu}
$$

is called the main effect of feedback type. Notice the subtraction of the grand mean. 

We do that because we want to know what feedback types do *on top of* the grand mean.

Similarly, for the main effect of task difficulty, we have:

$$
\widehat{\beta_j} = \frac{1}{IK}\sum_{i,k}(y_{i,j,k}- \hat{\mu}) = \frac{1}{IK}\sum_{i,k}y_{i,j,k}-\hat{\mu}
$$

What about the term $\widehat{(\alpha\beta)_{i,j}}$?

It is called the interaction between feedback type and task difficulty. 

$$
\widehat{(\alpha\beta)_{i,j}} = \frac{1}{K} \sum_{k} y_{i,j,k} - \hat{\mu} - \widehat{\alpha_i} - \widehat{\beta_j}
$$

We want to know what $\widehat{(\alpha\beta)_{i,j}}$ does, *on top of* $\widehat{\alpha_i}$, $\widehat{\beta_j}$ and the grand mean $\widehat{\mu}$.

And the remainder $\widehat{\varepsilon_{i,j,k}}$ is the residual error for this participant $k$ in cell $(i,j)$

$$
\begin{aligned}
\widehat{\varepsilon_{i,j,k}} &= y_{i,j,k}-\hat{\mu} - \widehat{\alpha_i} -\widehat{\beta_j} - \widehat{(\alpha\beta)_{i,j}} \\
&= y_{i,j,k} - \hat{\mu} - \widehat{\alpha_i} - \widehat{\beta_j} - (\frac{1}{K} \sum_{k} y_{i,j,k} - \hat{\mu} - \widehat{\alpha_i} - \widehat{\beta_j}) \\
&= y_{i,j,k} - \frac{1}{K} \sum_{k} y_{i,j,k}
\end{aligned}
$$

Let

$$
\begin{gather*}
\bar{y}_{i,.,.} = \frac{1}{JK} \sum_{j,k} y_{i,j,k} \\
\bar{y}_{.,j,.} = \frac{1}{IK}\sum_{i,k}y_{i,j,k} \\
\bar{y}_{i,j,.} = \frac{1}{K} \sum_{k} y_{i,j,k}
\end{gather*}
$$

and take these back into our formerly defined model:

$$
\begin{align*}
y_{i,j,k} &= \hat\mu + (\frac{1}{JK} \sum_{j,k} y_{i,j,k} - \hat\mu) + (\frac{1}{IK}\sum_{i,k}y_{i,j,k}- \hat\mu) + \frac{1}{K} \sum_{k} y_{i,j,k} - \hat\mu + \varepsilon_{i,j,k} \\
y_{i,j,k} &= \hat\mu + (\bar{y}_{i,.,.} - \hat\mu) + (\bar{y}_{.,j,.} - \hat\mu) + (\bar{y}_{i,j,.} - \bar{y}_{i,.,.} - \bar{y}_{.,j,.} + \hat\mu) + (y_{i,j,k} - \bar{y}_{i,j,.}) \\
y_{i,j,k} - \hat\mu &= \underbrace{(\bar{y}_{i,.,.} - \hat\mu)}_{\widehat{\alpha_i}} + \underbrace{(\bar{y}_{.,j,.} - \hat\mu)}_{\widehat{\beta_j}} + \underbrace{(\bar{y}_{i,j,.} - \bar{y}_{i,.,.} - \bar{y}_{.,j,.} + \hat\mu)}_{\widehat{(\alpha\beta)_{i,j}}} + \underbrace{(y_{i,j,k} - \bar{y}_{i,j,.})}_{\widehat{\varepsilon_{i,j,k}}}
\end{align*}
$$

Now, what happens if we apply the sample variance operator on both sides?

Since our fitted components are functions of random variables, they too can be considered random variables before putting in the data. 

Therefore, we want to ask how the variation in $y_{i,j,k}$ is distributed across these fitted components. 

Recall how we often compute variance:

$$
\mathrm{Var}(X) = \mathbb{E}(X^2)-(\mathbb{E}(X))^2
$$

And its unbiased sample variance

$$
s^2(X) = \frac{1}{N-1}\sum_{i} (X_i-\bar{X})^2 = \frac{1}{N-1}\sum_{i}X_i^2-\frac{N}{N-1}\bar{X}^2
$$

We then apply the unbiased sample variance operator on both side.

$$s^2(y_{i,j,k} - \hat\mu) = s^2[(\bar{y}_{i,.,.} - \hat\mu) + (\bar{y}_{.,j,.} - \hat\mu) + (\bar{y}_{i,j,.} - \bar{y}_{i,.,.} - \bar{y}_{.,j,.} + \hat\mu) + (y_{i,j,k} - \bar{y}_{i,j,.})]$$

The common factor $\frac{1}{N-1}$ gets cancelled out.



Notice that 

$$
\begin{gather*}
\sum_{i,j,k}(y_{i,j,k}-\hat\mu) = \sum_{i,j,k}(y_{i,j,k} - \frac{1}{IJK} \sum_{i,j,k}y_{i,j,k}) = 0 \\
\sum_{i,j,k} (\bar{y}_{i,.,.} - \hat\mu) = \sum_{j,k} \sum_{i} (\bar{y}_{i,.,.} - \hat\mu) = \sum_{j,k} \sum_{i} \frac{1}{JK} \sum_{j,k}{y_{i,j,k}} - IJK\hat\mu = 0 \\
\sum_{i,j,k} (\bar{y}_{.,j,.}-\hat\mu) = 0 \\
\sum_{i,j,k} (\bar{y}_{i,j,.} - \bar{y}_{i,.,.} - \bar{y}_{.,j,.} + \hat\mu) = K \sum_{i,j}\bar{y}_{i,j,.} - JK\sum_{i}\bar{y}_{i,.,.} - IK\sum_{j}\bar{y}_{.,j,.} + IJK\hat\mu = 0 \\
\sum_{i,j,k} (y_{i,j,k} - \bar{y}_{i,j,.}) = IJK\hat\mu -IJK\hat\mu = 0
\end{gather*}
$$


Therefore, we have

$$
\sum_{i,j,k}(y_{i,j,k}-\hat\mu)^2 - 0 = \sum_{i,j,k}[(\bar{y}_{i,.,.} - \hat\mu) + (\bar{y}_{.,j,.} - \hat\mu) + (\bar{y}_{i,j,.} - \bar{y}_{i,.,.} - \bar{y}_{.,j,.} + \hat\mu) + (y_{i,j,k} - \bar{y}_{i,j,.})]^2 - 0 \\
$$

We want to decompose the above structure further using the following property of variance

$$
\operatorname{Var}(X+Y)=\operatorname{Var}(X)+\operatorname{Var}(Y)
\quad\text{iff}\quad
\operatorname{Cov}(X,Y)=0.
$$

It can be proved that here $(\bar{y}_{i,.,.} - \hat\mu)$, $(\bar{y}_{.,j,.} - \hat\mu)$, $(\bar{y}_{i,j,.} - \bar{y}_{i,.,.} - \bar{y}_{.,j,.} + \hat\mu)$, and $(y_{i,j,k} - \bar{y}_{i,j,.})$ are all *orthogonal*, and their covariances with each other are all zero. Details of this will be discussed in the later section. 

$$
\sum_{i,j,k}(y_{i,j,k}-\hat\mu)^2 = \sum_{i,j,k}(\bar{y}_{i,.,.} - \hat\mu)^2 + \sum_{i,j,k} (\bar{y}_{.,j,.} - \hat\mu)^2 + \sum_{i,j,k} (\bar{y}_{i,j,.} - \bar{y}_{i,.,.} - \bar{y}_{.,j,.} + \hat\mu)^2 + \sum_{i,j,k} (y_{i,j,k} - \bar{y}_{i,j,.})^2\\
$$

Let 

$$
\begin{gather*}
\mathrm{SS_T} = \sum_{i,j,k}(y_{i,j,k}-\hat\mu)^2 \\
\mathrm{SS_A} = \sum_{i,j,k}(\bar{y}_{i,.,.} - \hat\mu)^2 \\
\mathrm{SS_B} = \sum_{i,j,k} (\bar{y}_{.,j,.} - \hat\mu)^2 \\
\mathrm{SS_{A\times B}} = \sum_{i,j,k} (\bar{y}_{i,j,.} - \bar{y}_{i,.,.} - \bar{y}_{.,j,.} + \hat\mu)^2 \\
\mathrm{SS_E} = \sum_{i,j,k} (y_{i,j,k} - \bar{y}_{i,j,.})^2
\end{gather*}
$$

We now obtain the classic ANOVA formula for this experiment:

$$
\mathrm{SS_T} = \mathrm{SS_A} + \mathrm{SS_B} + \mathrm{SS_{A\times B}} + \mathrm{SS_E}
$$